JUDY WOODRUFF: Lack of access to running water
is an issue in many developing countries,
but it turns out it's also a problem in the
United States.
The sprawling Navajo Nation reservation is
the size of West Virginia and it spreads across
13 counties in New Mexico, Arizona and Utah.
Special correspondent Fred de Sam Lazaro traveled
to Thoreau, New Mexico, and has this report
on new efforts to get on the grid to get the
water.
It's part of his ongoing series Agents for
Change and this week's Leading Edge segment.
Darlene Arviso's truck route takes her to
some of the most remote and isolated people
in America.
She is their link to the world outside, her
payload literally a lifeline.
DARLENE ARVISO, Truck Driver: The kids would
be yelling, running to the water truck when
I'm coming up to their house.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: She's known as the Water
Lady in a region where 40 percent of residents
have no access to running water.
Many live in such extreme poverty, they can't
even afford large containers.
Often Darlene Arviso delivers more than just
water.
Working with her church and other charities,
she helped this family at the onset of last
winter.
DARLENE ARVISO: I brought them food.
I saw the trailer, the small one.
We gave out some blankets to cover the window.
That time, it was snowing.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: So, it gets pretty cold
up here?
DARLENE ARVISO: Yes, it gets very cold.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: A few miles away, Arviso
has a new customer.
Tina Bicenti returned to her family's ancestral
land from a trailer park she had rented in
the town of Thoreau, New Mexico.
Despite the harsh conditions, she wanted to
raise her five children, including 6-month-old
twin girls, on the Navajo Reservation.
TINA BICENTI, Mother: I wanted to have my
children have more open space for them to
run around outside.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: What they gave up are
two of life's most basic amenities, electricity
and running water.
Water they use in their new home is carried
in from Bicenti's mother's home a mile down
the road at the other end of their homestead.
Even using the toilet involves a trip to grandma's
house.
TINA BICENTI: I am planning to look into getting
a port-a-potty or a port-a-outhouse.
As for the shower and the bath, I can't really
do anything unless I have a main water line,
until I have a septic service and all of that.
But, like I said, I can't get that.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Due to a long waiting
list, getting connected to the main water
line could take up to 15 years, and it will
cost more than $12,000.
Although Bicenti works full-time, piped-in
water is a luxury she cannot afford.
GEORGE MCGRAW, Founder, DigDeep: For a long
time, we told those people, just wait.
Infrastructure will catch up with you.
Well, infrastructure is not coming.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: George McGraw founded
a group called DigDeep that used to work on
water projects in Africa, but is now directing
its efforts to help some of two million people
in this country, like the Bicenti family,
who lack access to clean water and sanitation.
GEORGE MCGRAW: When the backhoe is active,
everyone needs to have a hardhat on.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: That includes 18,000 homes
in the Navajo Nation.
Wells are not an option for most homeowners.
They're deep, expensive, and there's no guarantee
of clean water.
GEORGE MCGRAW: A lack of clean water in the
United States does exactly the same thing
to families it does around the world.
It impacts their health, their ability to
hold down a job, to get an education, their
ability to spend time with their kids, to
play, to have a happy life.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: DigDeep's solution is
in off-grid systems that don't require a utility
hookup.
Tina Bicenti's is one of nearly 300 homes
being fitted with large water storage systems
and solar-powered pumps to bring drinking
water directly into the home.
TINA BICENTI: It's going to be good, because
we don't have to haul water.
We will have it here.
It will allow us to give the girls a bath
in the sink, because they're still small,
and it will allow the drinking water.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: As more of these 1,200-gallon
cisterns are installed, there's a need for
a more convenient water source.
So, DigDeep is looking for spots to drill
more unity wells like this one.
It's a costly and time-consuming process.
The first task when water comes out of this
hole is to make sure that it's free of contaminants.
Uranium from old mines is a common one.
If it checks out as clean, this well will
bring huge savings for hundreds of families
who come from miles around here.
On average, residents of the Navajo Reservation
pay 13 cents for a gallon of water.
That is 72 times what a typical rate payer
pays in suburban Arizona or New Mexico.
GEORGE MCGRAW: We spend a lot of our time
out here working on water project, but a lot
more time in our office in Los Angeles, for
instance, trying to convince everybody in
America they should pay attention to this
problem, care about it, and want to do something
about it.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Last year, DigDeep did
manage to convince some nearby Rotary Clubs,
which pledged some $75,000, which will fund
about 18 installations like this one Tina
Bicenti's home.
Rotary International has long been involved
in clean water projects around the world,
but Jim Bissonett of Scottsdale, Arizona,
said they never imagine doing this work in
their own backyard.
JIM BISSONETT, Rotary International: It's
kind of a shock when you think that people
in the United States don't have running water.
We're going to change the lives of this family
dramatically from the water they were carrying
in pickle jars to their house actually having
running water.
And that's a huge shift for them.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: They will have a few more
small luxuries with the new rooftop, solar
panel.
It will drive the water pump and also some
basic LED lighting.
TINA BICENTI: Lights.
Well, we have power.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Projects like these also
help train and provide work that can keep
local talent local.
Twenty-three-year-old Annie Begay's skills
could fetch a job anywhere in America, but
she's thrilled to be able to stay in the place
she calls home.
ANNIE BEGAY, DigDeep: You get to know the
family before we put in the systems.
You get to know a little bit of their background.
And it's where I grew up, so it's a good feeling
knowing that you're helping where you grew
up.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Finally, at the end of
a long day, the Water Lady arrived for her
big delivery, and Annie Begay tightened the
last screws.
It was time to gather around the sink for
an impromptu celebration, as Tina Bicenti
turned on the faucet, a mundane and giant
leap for this family into the modern world
that many of her neighbors are still waiting
to join.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Fred de Sam Lazaro
in the Navajo Nation.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Not taking water for granted.
And Fred's wonderful reporting is a partnership
with the Under-Told Stories Project at the
University of St. Thomas in Minnesota.